{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1504\cocoasubrtf830
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12240\viewh13400\viewkind1
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl285\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 REALTIME FILE\
\
UMB\uc0\u8209  Webinar\
Thursday, December 21, 2017\
11:45 a.m. Eastern Time\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl285\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl285\qc\partightenfactor0
\cf0 REMOTE CART CAPTIONING PROVIDED BY:\
ALTERNATIVE COMMUNICATION SERVICES, LLC\
www.CaptionFamily.com\
\
*  *  *  *  *\
\pard\tx432\tx1152\tx1584\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\pardeftab720\li180\ri0\qc\partightenfactor0
\cf0 This is being provided in a rough-draft format. Communication Access Realtime Translation (CART) captioning is provided in order to facilitate communication accessibility and may not be a totally verbatim record of the proceedings.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl285\qc\partightenfactor0
\cf0 * * * *\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl285\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\
\
>> Great, we'll begin in just a few moments.  For everyone who is on the line now, welcome. \
\
We'll begin in just a moment.  So if you're calling in today, please mute your phones. \
\
Welcome everyone.  Please mute your phones if you're calling in today by pressing star pound.  We'll begin in just a few minutes. \
\
>> Audio recording for this meeting has begun. \
\
(Beeping)\
\
>> Hello everyone.  And welcome to this Explore VR webinar.  Using labor market information to inform outcomes, Connecticut VR Services for the blind.  My name is Katie Allen, and I'm going to go over a few things before we begin the webinar today.\
\
As participants, we ask that you listen to today's presentation through computer speakers or your headphones.  If you need to call into the webinar today, please mute your phones.  This is to avoid broadcasting any background noise in your environment to the webinar.  If you can't find the mute button on your phone, you can dial*#.  If you continue to experience any technical difficulties, please just type in the question and comment box on the right side of your screen.  And I can assist you with those technical issues.\
\
We've reserved some time at the end of today's presentation for your questions and comments.  We encourage you to type if your questions during the presentation and we'll address them at the end.\
\
If you would like a copy of the PowerPoint presentation, you can download it on the resources for download box.  You can also find them on www.exploreVR.org.  At the end of the presentation, there will be a link that will appear on the screen for the evaluation.  You can follow this link to fill out the evaluation.  And if you're requesting CRC credits for this webinar, you must complete the evaluation to receive credit.\
And this webinar is worth one CRC credit.\
\
Finally, this webinar is being recorded and it will be archived on www.exploreVR.org.\
\
Dana Jefferson will be your host for today's webinar from the ICI.  And she's going to introduce the presenters for today's webinar.  But first I'll go through and just explain a little bit about the JD\uc0\u8209 VRTAC before Dana introduces your presenters. \
\
So for the webinar objectives today, first I'm going to talk a little bit about the JD\uc0\u8209 VRTAC goals, partners, and the technical assistance that we provide.  And then when your host Dana introduces the presenters from Connecticut, they'll talk about their background and services, as well their JD\u8209 VRTAC background, the purposes and goals of their project, how they've implemented their project, some of their accomplishments, as well as some of their challenges and lessons learned, and the current status of their project.  And then they'll talk a little bit about how some of the T.A. they received, what was helpful in the process, and some of their goals and next steps for the future.\
\
For the JD\uc0\u8209 VRTAC project as a whole, the goal is to improve the skills of staff and providers of VR services who are trained to provide VR services to people with disabilities, and providers.\
\
The JD\uc0\u8209 VRTAC focuses on these four topic areas of business engagement, employer supports, labor market information, and customized training.\
\
In addition to the Institute for Community Inclusion, and University of Massachusetts, we partner with jobs for the future, the University of Washington, the council administrators or CSAVR, as well as the United States Business Leadership Network, and the Association of University Centers on Disabilities.  And we also work with the National Council of State Agencies for the Blind and the Technical Assistance Center Collaborative. \
\
I won't go into detail, but the JD\uc0\u8209 VRTAC provides three types of T.A., intensive, targeted, and universal.  And the intensive T.A. is what Connecticut received through this project. \
\
And just one more thing about the JD\uc0\u8209 VRTAC is the learning collaborative.  So as part of receiving technical assistance, states are part of a learning collaborative, so they meet a couple of times a year and give some project updates.  They collaborate across agencies and participate in discussions together, as well as regular phone calls and other communities of practice and other types of communication.\
\
So without further ado, I'm going to turn it over to Dana to introduce your presenters today.\
\
>> DANA JEFFERSON: Hi.  Thanks, Katie.  I'm Dana Jefferson.  I'm a senior policy fellow with the Institute for Community Inclusion.  I'm filling in today for Vito DeSantis who couldn't make it.  But he was actually the project lead on this particular project.  But I was very happy to also serve on this project, as well.  And got to meet the wonderful folks who I'll be introducing.\
\
First today we have Mary Burgard who is a VR supervisor.  We'll have Julie McLean who is a V.R. teacher.  And Jonathan who is a consultant.  And I'll be back on at the end.  Of course you can type any questions during the time in the question box.  And we will get to them at the end of the presentation.  So right now, I will turn it over to my friends from Connecticut Blind.\
\
>> MARY BURGARD: Good afternoon.  This is Mary Burgard.  What we decided to do is switch off per slide by staff person.  I'll do one slide and then say next and Jonathan and Julie will take over the rest of the slides.\
\
Just to give you a little idea for a background of BESB.  BESB used to be a standalone separate agency for the blind.  We used to be one of the oldest state agencies back in 1893  We merged in 2011 and became the Department of Rehabilitation Services.  We merged under a new umbrella, a new agency was created with the general V.R. agency.  We still remain a separate agency, or a separate bureau for the blind, with four major divisions.  Within our VRO, we have adult services division, children services division, an enterprise program, and vocational rehabilitation.\
\
Currently we serve about 3,000 active clients within the agency, and over 15,000 currently on our blind registry, with a staff of about 100.\
\
We offer services in all of the divisions such as rehabilitation teaching, orientation mobility, assistive technology, teachers of the visually impaired, and the voc rehab division.  We have about 17 staff with 850 active clients.  Our VR division consists of VR counselors, rehabilitation teachers, and rehabilitation technologists.  I'll pass over to Jonathan. \
\
>> JONATHAN RICHMOND: Next slide please.  A major reason we became involved in this project was actually because of the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act, which was signed into law July 22nd of 2014.  We realized this was going to be a major change for us in how we do day\uc0\u8209 to\u8209 day basis.  The counselors having to do quarterly reporting as well as post\u8209 closure reporting, as well as having to expand our business engagement, as well as the partnerships we're going to have to have with our workforce innovation boards.\
\
We were actually having a lot of issues even prior to the implementation of WIOA.  This consists of a lot of paperwork that the counselors were doing.  There was lots of duplication of paperwork.  Lots of forms.\
Counselors were being asked to complete more and more paperwork.\
\
And because of all of this paperwork, they were spending less and less time counseling with the clients, as well as going out and meeting with businesses.\
\
In addition to this, counselors were running very high caseloads of approximately 100 clients each on their caseloads.\
And part of the reason for this is because our average for VR counselors have actually been here about approximately 20 years\'a0+.  But now individuals, the counselors are starting to retire.  And as they're retiring, the Connecticut budget is not that great.  So we're having issues filling positions.  And if we are able to fill a position, it's often several months before we can have someone brand new start, which means by that time there is usually someone else beginning to retire.\
\
And particularly, VR counselors and clients were not accessing LMI information to make client career choices.  What we would pretty much do is say if a client had a goal, we would just go with that.  We would say with the Oh, sure, that's a great idea.  We would just write an I.P.E. for that.  The clients were not researching a career goal, the counselors were not researching career goals.  And really a lot of bad decisions were being made.\
\
So we would some individuals and clients who would just keep going to college to get degree out of degree.  Or they would change in the middle of college several times to keep going into different fields.  And a few examples of where we started to see a pattern is a client who was becoming a paralegal, and she was obtaining a master's degree to become a paralegal, and in Connecticut you can do that with an associate's degree.  So here in Connecticut we paid for her all the way up through a master's degree.\
\
Social workers.  We had many, many individuals wanting to become getting social workers.  They would go all the way up through getting their master's degrees and remain unemployed.  Another common vocational goal is massage therapist.  In the state of Connecticut it's a saturated market.  And to have a career and earn competitive wages, that's a goal where it's very, very difficult.  We would be putting people through that program, and they would get out and get a job but with very, very limited income.\
\
And then the other issues we were having this because of this, not making or identifying realistic vocational goals is we did not have qualified and prepared clients for employer job openings.  We would constantly go out to meet with businesses and they would be very interested in hiring individuals, but we could not meet their hiring needs. \
\
Internally we did not have the pipeline for what they were even going to need for the future because we were not taking a look at what are the current needs, what are the future needs.  In turn, we would have clients with college degrees who would remain unemployed. \
\
Next slide please? \
\
>> MARY BURGARD: Okay, our project purpose and goals.  We had primarily three purposes for our goals to increase V.R. counselors' knowledge of information.  We did a pre-survey to get an idea of what the counselors were using for current labor market information for the state of Connecticut and the results came out very low.  Some staff didn't know what labor market information or how to use labor market information in their plan for development and job goals.  And the other was to reduce the number of clients choosing careers with low job prospects.  Even though Connecticut is a relatively small state, relatively speaking.  But it's still where there are some rural areas with limited transportation.  Each V.R. counselor was using the labor market information to know in the cities what opportunities will have career growth.  Rather than creating a plan for employment where there will be no job available for them in the area where they live. \
\
So in order to use the labor market information to help develop, you know, what job search they will do in their area and career and, you know, using the career index.  Next? \
\
>> JONATHAN RICHMOND: Next slide please.  For the project implementation, what we began with was by reviewing all the V.R. processes with staff and looked at ways to streamline our paperwork.  And one decision we made from the very beginning was to have all the V.R. counselors participate in this process as well as some other V.R. staff.  And then we began looking at how we were doing work, how we were processing paperwork, how we were processing forms, what the duplications were.\
\
So what we did is we began actually getting rid of a lot of different paper forms.  We streamlined the paperwork, for example authorizations.  And for one example, authorizations, counselors were creating authorizations for example for low vision.  And there could be 12 different items.  And it would take them a very long time to create an authorization.  So we identified one person who was actually a clerical person to create those authorizations, which would free up the counselors.\
\
Another issue we identified is following up on bills in terms of the payment.  So again, we identified a portion for that to streamline that process to reduce the time the counselors had to spend on the bills.  And duplication.  We were writing the same information over and over in different spots and on different forms.  We really streamlined our paperwork by reducing a lot of the paperwork.\
\
And then the next part, which happened simultaneously.  We also conducted a pre\uc0\u8209 survey to assess counselors' knowledge, their current knowledge of LMI information.  And what was very interesting about that is that this really helped us understand what the VR counselors thought in terms of how important labor market information was.  And five out of ten counselors either disagreed or strongly disagreed that LMI should be used with consumers.\
\
So what this really means is that we had half of our staff stating that we do not need to look at Career Index Plus, we do not need to look at labor market information.  We should just go and create any career goal that someone wants, which really was not working.  We were realizing that that was going to be a major training component that we were going to have to look at to really educate our counselors as to the importance of that.\
\
Then the next project implementation is we began researching, reviewing, and choosing LMI data resources.  There's a lot of LMI data out there, which can be very, very, very overwhelming.  And examples would be the ONET, you have the Department of Employment Security, the Connecticut Department of Labor, U.S. bureau of labor statistics.  And you have workforce boards.  Different regions in Connecticut, the different workforce boards would have their own type of LMI information.  This is very, very overwhelming and it really caused us to get really bogged down on choosing what we were going to use. \
\
So what we end up doing is we narrowed down all this different LMI, the different resources and we chose to use the Career Index Plus.  And so that is with the Career Index Plus is what we chose to focus on for training for all our staff.  So what we did next is with the V.R. counselors, we had them go through LMI professional development through multiple sources.  One source was to go through a four\uc0\u8209 part Career Index Plus training system.  This was set up with four different webinars where they were able to learn an introduction to the Career Index Plus, navigating and utilizing the complex labor market information system.  And the next webinar was getting started in labor market information.  And the third one was enhancing the client\u8209 counselor relationship through development and use of client profiles.  And the final one was an advanced use for counselors and clients to use the Career Index Plus in the workforce development system.\
\
So that was one part of the training that we did for all our counselors, but then the second component is that we had Maryann Diedic come in to actually meet with all the staff here and labor market information and ethics of it.  And some of the topics that she covered is really what is LMI.  Because based off the survey, a lot of counselors weren't even sure what labor market information was.  Why do we use labor market information?  How does labor market information, how does WIO incorporate into this?  As well as some of the ethical considerations and how LMI can be used in the counseling process.\
\
So this training was very, very helpful to be able to get the counselors to have a better understanding of why this is important. \
\
So with counselors now understanding labor market information, being exposed to different LMI resources, and us choosing to use the Career Index Plus, we chose to use a two\uc0\u8209 prong approach.  One approach was to establish one person as the single point of contact.  This person would be the expert in learning everything about the Career Index Plus.  This would be the go\u8209 to person, this would be the person who would research issues around using the Career Index Plus.  And in our objective for this, it was a two\u8209 prong approach.\
\
One was for the single point of contact to be able to work with the V.R. counselors and training them and for V.R. counselor, instead of them getting stuff and not understanding how to use something, and try to figure it out themselves, which can become very time consuming, they can go right to the single point of contact.\
\
And the second prong approach would be for clients.  Actually have clients involved and have them have more input and involvement in choosing their vocational goal.  And this is the second part in terms of the single point of contact to be able to train clients and then also answer their questions.\
Next page please. \
\
>> MARY BURGARD: For the project accomplishments, the first phase of the program was to get the staff together.\
I think one of the unique things we did is from the very beginning we brought in the V.R. staff to get their buy\uc0\u8209 in regarding what they feel they can, you know, be part of the process in helping make the paperwork and the process of V.R. more streamlined to give them more time and focus on working with their clients to be able to take on this new, you know, navigating around Career Index Plus and using LMI for developing these job goals.\
\
So we worked on that for probably about a good part of a year.  And you know, we were successful.  We were able to change a lot of duplication of paperwork, different forms that we had to create.  Different ways that they were using, like we still currently use it, but they use it differently now.  And they use more of the labor market information, whether it be local through the Department of Labor, as well as Career Index Plus.  That was one of our very first accomplishments.  And as Jonathan said we at the time were going through a lot.  It's helping us figure out where to use the V.R. counselor's time the best.\
\
The second part is we were a little delayed in getting the roll\uc0\u8209 out of the Career Index Plus, but we went through a lot of training on how to use Career Index Plus, how to use labor market information prior to rolling it out.  We rolled it out about eight months ago.  And, you know, after training all the staff and all the V.R. staff basically, our rehab teacher, along with the V.R. counselors.\
\
And originally when we first started the project we did a pre\uc0\u8209 survey.  And in that Jonathan said the results were very low.  Staff indicated that they didn't feel the need or usefulness of labor market information or what it was.  After we did the project, we did the post survey.  It ended up being ten staff.  All completed it.  And the results were 100%.  Everybody is using it and finds it useful.  It's a really positive outcome from the pre\'a0to the post survey.\
\
So basically every V.R. counselor is using Career Index Plus for developing the career goals and the IPEs with their clients prior to developing the IPE and the overall goal and services that will come along with it.\
\
We, at the time that we rolled out Career Index Plus, we sent out a mass mailing to all of our clients who are active in the voc rehab program, encouraging them to call from training.  We established a single point of contact.  Jonathan Richmond, who we just heard from, was the person who is kind of coordinating with the counselors and the staff.  But Julie McLean, who you're going to hear from next, is the single point of contact for employees using the program for accessibility purposes and trying to navigate around.  Clients call them and they receive the letter and we have quite a few.  We've asked Julie to come today and the next couple of slides are going to be Julie talking about her experience in training our clients on the use of Career Index Plus.\
\
>> JONATHAN RICHMOND: And just to expand, what Mary said about the mailing, I believe there is an attachment.  So everybody can access the letter that we sent out to everybody, which was several hundred clients.  And with that, I will turn it over to Julie.  And she will first give a case example about training and preparing to become the single point of contact.\
\
>> DANA JEFFERSON: Jonathan, this is Dana.  Yes.  If everybody looks in the resources for download, they will see that letter there and they can upload that file.  Sorry, Julie. \
\
>> JULIE MCLEAN: That's quite all right. \
\
>> JONATHAN RICHMOND: Okay, great.  Julie?\
\
>> JULIE MCLEAN: Hi, I'm Julie McLean.  And I've had an interesting experience working in the Connecticut V.R. system.  I came in as a rehab teacher, but worked with non\uc0\u8209 competitive case closures in V.R., which also incorporated a lot of technology skills training.  So the people I worked with weren't looking for competitive employment or wages.  So when I was told about this Career Index Plus form, I thought this ought to be interesting. \
\
So I went in to test it to see how well it works with accessible technologists.  I'm a JAWS screen reader user.  And we also have clients who use magnification, ZoomText.  And in my experience, I registered with my V.R. e\uc0\u8209 mail, and that allowed me to invite myself as a client.  And I signed up under myself and sent an invitation to myself with my personal e\u8209 mail to see what our clients were going to experience when they started using this tool. \
\
And I found it very interesting just on that first screen where you could put in a job search title.  And all the information that would come up on that very first screen.  About types of jobs and a little bit of information about what types of jobs were connected to certain titles.  And I ran into some accessibility issues right away.  And therefore we held up that 700\uc0\u8209 letter mailing until it completely worked with JAWS and ZoomText.  Because there was no way I wanted people calling in and saying well I'm having problems if I couldn't do it myself.  Because that was a big part of our delay in getting me ready to really answer questions and assist clients using this career index. \
\
So we can move next.  One of the things that I learned working with our clients, it's very much like being a teacher.  You have to really work with individuals to meet their specific needs.  There are certain people that do really well just with basic information, looking at job titles, and, you know, clicking on a job title and looking at some related information about it.  And then there are other people who are a lot more advanced.  I found that if you use screen magnification versus JAWS, you had a lot easier time.  And that's just no way around that.  It's even true when we find jobs for our clients.  We've been able to work with that and make things accessible.  So people can find jobs and be successful. \
\
I pulled one of my coworkers to look at the screen when I was testing them.  And I said "Am I crazy, because this isn't working right?"  And it's a gentleman who retired and he was a technologist here.  He said "You're not Julie.  I think they tested this with the monitor turned on.  They are looking at the screen and you can't look at the screen.  And that's why it's not working right."  So once we got those problems all cleared up, I had clients who called in.  Some of them just wanted to know more about that letter.  And they were using all different web browsers.  Some are using Internet Explorer.  Some were using FireFox.  Some with Google Chrome.  And there were certain issues within each of the browsers, as well. \
\
I found it fascinating.  They put in the title of radio broadcaster and there were two jobs in Connecticut and there was no growth potential whatsoever.  Some believed it and were accepting of it.  Others were thinking oh, well, I'll be that one who gets that job working in the sports field or doing some other thing that is their dream job. \
\
I did find a lot of people who looked at that labor market information and discovered that maybe that's not the best field for me to go in because there isn't a lot of growth potential.  I know there was one gentleman who I spoke with who didn't have a college degree.  And he said well, I don't want to be a bagger at the grocery store.\
I said, well, we can put something else in.  And we put in customer service.  And all kinds of positions came up that did not require a college degree.  And so I think people can't really think beyond what they know.  And that's one of the beauties of this tool.  That it expands people's thinking and what the different possibilities are for sure.\
\
I got a call from a woman who used Career Index and, you know, I learned in talking with her that she was already registered on indeed.com and had her resume posted.  That's an example of somebody who called me to find out well what's the difference with Career Index versus just looking at Indeed.  And I was able to tell her well you get this labor market information that you wouldn't get necessarily on Indeed.  You could look at all that's out there, but if you really want to know specifics of what's required and how much money you might make, or, you know, if you need an advanced degree, that's something that Career Index, the way it's designed to gather information from multiple websites can streamline it all in one place.  It's really, really helpful. \
\
I did it over the phone, face to face, in person, and I did one small group, which is interesting.  It was a job club that came into our office and I presented the Career Index and there was a big difference in the motivation and interest of some of the participants versus others.  And I had written up a short summary of how to use this, the tool.  And there were several people as a result who went out on their own that were quite successful in doing work in helping to decide what kinds of jobs were possible and what was achievable.  And I think that's one of the most important things that we have done here in Connecticut is to get our clients involved in the process.  And that's to have the continual attitude that our V.R. counselor is going to find us a job.  What do you want to do?  Oh, I'll do anything.  But really they need to be part of the process.  They need to take some ownership of developing their skills, their job\uc0\u8209 ready skills, in order to make them successful.  So I think that really helps using this Career Index. \
\
And next. \
\
>> JONATHAN RICHMOND: Next slide please.  Challenges and lessons learned.  I would first like to state that there were definitely challenges and lessons learned, but the overall experience has been very, very positive.  And like Julie just stated, it's empowering clients, it's giving staff, voc rehab counselors a lot more free time to do other types of work.  So there has been lots of successes which we're very happy with.  But with that of course are some challenges and lessons learned  And one challenge was multiple staff retirement.\
\
V.R. counselors, as I stated earlier, had probably been here an average of 20 years.  There is one person who has actually been here 33 years who will be retiring in a few months.  Another person, 20\'a0+\'a0years, retiring.  By the summer of 2018, over half of our counselors will be new, within a year or three or four months.  That's a lot of turnover.  But this is also a positive.  Because you have new individuals, new staff coming in, where they don't know how we used to do business.  They don't know how it used to be before WIOA, before the Workforce innovation and opportunity act.  We're able to mold and train them into how exactly we want the day\uc0\u8209 to\u8209 day job to be.  So each person who is brand new that is hired, it really has been very, very positive because they're really jumping right onto this.  And what's nice about this is I actually get a monthly report of how much time each counselor has been on the Career Index Plus.  So I'm actually able to monitor whether someone has been on once or 50 times and how many different parts or how many different hits that they had.  And one thing with the brand new staff, they're at the very, very top of the list for being on there the most for helping to identify that vocational goal.\
\
The second challenge was just the delay in rolling out the Career Index Plus.  And Julie touched on that a little bit.  And although there were some testing where Julie did the testing all ahead of time and there were some accessibility issues, what was very nice about that was Julie was able to work with the development team and they were able to communicate back and forth on a very regular basis and work out a lot of the kinks.  There was lots of testing and lots of communication that occurred, which meant for the positive of when Julie began working with individuals that it actually, they could use it.  It was accessible.  And so that's where the delay was with rolling out the Career Index Plus because we had to hold up on sending out the mass letter, the mass mailing to everyone, until we knew that the system was tested and working.\
\
And another challenge was streamlining the entire V.R. paperwork process.  There were so many components to this.  And again, like I stated earlier, that we have the staff involved in this process.  But as you know, when you ask for staff involvement, you get lots of different personalities, lots of different ideas, lots of different input.  You have some individuals asking for us to change processes that are unrealistic that we just can't do.  But also besides the voc rehab counselor, that also meant for our clerical staff them having to take on more responsibilities and them changing the way that they do day\uc0\u8209 to\u8209 day business, as well as our business office.  So we really crossed over from more than just being the V.R. counselors when we really looked at making all of this streamlining the paperwork. \
\
We're very, very glad that we had the voc rehab counselors as part of this process, even though I stated a second ago that you have different personalities, individuals asking for things that weren't realistic.  But I really think the reason this was a success is we had from the very beginning the voc rehab counselors involved.  I think Mary, Brian, and myself had an initial meeting with Dana and Vito and DeBrittany.  And what we took away from that when we had our first initial meeting is we had our voc rehab counselors there, so they felt a part of the process from the very beginning.  And a lesson learned would be introducing several different types of LMI information.\
\
So I remember as I started getting involved in this process, the very first thing that was stated to me was just in terms of different kinds, well there's realtime, there's anecdotal, there's traditional, and each of those have large definitions.  Let alone when you start getting into all of your different resources.  One, for example, if you went onto the state of Connecticut Department of Labor site, just for their labor market information, there is so much information just on that one site, you could get overwhelmed.  And what I began doing as I was reaching out to different workforce boards, as I'm learning about the Career Index Plus and the Department of Labor, I started bombarding all the voc rehab counselors with all this different information, all different e\uc0\u8209 mails, sign up for this website, go take a look at this, here is information from this county, this area.  It was way too much.  And luckily, again, as part of the process, a few of the counselors came and spoke to me about this is overwhelming.  Counselors are not going to be reading this information.  It's too much.  So that is, as we started to narrow down, that's when we chose the Career Index Plus.  So if I could have done this over, the one thing I would have done is waited until we did all our research, waited until we identified what was going to be our primary source, which again was the Career Index Plus.  And then began rolling out that information to the counselors.  So that's one recommendation if anyone is going to follow a part of our model.  Don't just inundate and overwhelm the counselors with too much information.\
\
And so that's more or less what were some of the challenges and the lessons that were learned.  And it has overall been a very positive experience, but those are some of the challenges we had, as well as some of the things I would have done differently from my end. \
\
Next slide please. \
 \
\
>> Okay, as far as where we are today, we're going on two years of the technical assistance grant.  It's interesting to go back to where we started and where we are today.  And sometimes you don't realize all the changes that actually took place as a result of looking at different things within our program.  I think, you know, with the new WIOA implementation, as of July 1st, Career Index Plus has kind of been a really good tool for our counselors to be able to use to help develop attainable, realistic, you know, ITE goals.  You know, we're also as a lot of states, and Connecticut in particular, dealing with a lot of budget issues, a lot of budget issues.  So we are looking at implementing an order of selection, we're trying to avoid it as much as possible.\
\
So I think we've been able to use this tool to be able to, you know, focus what we're doing with our clients, being able to develop goals that are going to help get a job at the end that's going to be an obtainable, realistic job.  In particular, one of our areas of focus is college.  Working on, you know, everybody in the past, and we've been focusing on this for a number of years.  As we talked about earlier in the presentation of individuals wanting to go get their master's program.  So now have new, you know, kind of criteria to be able to focus on what do you need in order to do the job.  You know?  A lot of clients go from bachelor's and want to go right to their master's.  So this helps us develop what are the skills that you need in order to do this job?  Is this actually what you want to do before entering into a graduate school program.  We used that with the voc and also our transition students. \
\
So we're really widely using it.  Counselors continue to refer our clients to Julie, our rehab teacher, to help navigate around.  Again, I think that is one of the uniquenesses to our program.  We are referring our clients to use the Career Index Plus to, you know, one of the uniquenesses of our clients is for our clients to use it independently themselves.  I think that is one of the strengths of this whole project.  So they on their own can go and research their own career goals on their own computer, on their own time.  The counselors also use the Career Index Plus when they're sitting down with the clients.  So I think one of the things about Career Index Plus that's kind of nice is you can see, you know, how many invitations were sent out to clients, how many, you know, how much usage the counselors are doing.  So with that information, we've sat down and kind of had a group goal regarding how often they should be using the Career Index Plus along with individual goals of how often they need to use the Career Index Plus.\
\
We're using what's called TC recruiters to be able to track employers that we've reached out to in the past.  It's another accomplishment, a program that we're able to keep track of what employers have been hiring clients in the past, along with the general agents.  It's kind of a combined employer database.  We're also continuing to review our processes.  The policies are changing a little bit.  Where the outcome is or isn't there.  And the never\uc0\u8209 ending question to streamline the paperwork.  I think if you asked any of our counselors what they want most is to do less paperwork and get out in the field and help our clients in finding employment.\
\
That's kind of where we're at today.  Next slide? \
\
>> JONATHAN RICHMOND: I would just like to touch real briefly on what was most helpful in terms of receiving the technical assistance.  I would like to thank Vito, Dana, Debrittany.  Thank you so much for your help on this project.  It was the teleconferences and the trips that they all made to Connecticut so we could all have meetings.  And really what helps us with guidance and prioritizing our needs ask really establishing timeframes and then having to complete reports.  It's sometimes difficult as we're reporting back, but it really helps to keep us on timelines of what we needed to accomplish so we could make it through this process.\
\
And what was also very helpful, as you've heard throughout this, learn about the different LMI resources, which counselors can use to assist clients and make better career choices.  The end result of this is that the clients have more involvement in it and now we have a pipeline for businesses.  And we're glad that clients are learning to use Career Index Plus and what this also does is it frees up the voc rehab counselors, so they can put more of their energies in different areas, including on the Career Index Plus.\
\
Attending the outside state meetings were very helpful.  And some of the states that we learned from their experiences, we learned from their strategies.  I would like to thank Colorado Blind, New Jersey Blind, Washington State, Missouri, and Nebraska, just a few where there was a very similar connection.\
\
Next? \
\
>> MARY BURGARD: Our next steps and future directioning goals.  As Julie said, we're working on making Career Index Plus fully accessible to individuals who are legally blind.  It's not 100% accessible at this point.  And Julie has been at the table, like she discussed with work groups and other individuals throughout the country to help make it so it is fully accessible.  Because some browsers and different things don't 100% work with Career Index Plus.  So that's kind of the things that we're working on in the future.\
\
And then we're going to continue to track kind of how much usage and make sure our counselors are using it, that they're inviting our clients, you know, so enough people are aware of it.  Potentially doing another mailing in a few months to make sure that everybody knows that this resource is available and how they can access it, if the training is still available.\
\
You know, Julie is going to continue with this as part of her, you know, goals is to help as many clients as possible use this independently.  And that goal was to like we said give our clients a lot of, you know, independence in being able to research their job goals.  So they're really making informed, you know, good decisions on what's available in the job goal that they're choosing  What jobs are in their region.  You know, we're also looking at working with the Department of Labor.  We've had our staff also go through a lot of trainings and workshops regarding local LMI information.  So they're pretty good at that in Connecticut.  They have a website to be able to access in Connecticut what are some of the growing jobs, what are some of the decreasing jobs, in each region.  Like I said, there are some that are more rural and some that are more urban with better transportation and it varies.  Like in New Haven where you have hospitals, the growth of jobs could be in the healthcare field.  Whereas if you go down to Hartford, that's not necessarily the same.  So it just depends.  So we're working on making sure that we're accessing that information and clients are choosing the right career goals.\
\
And, you know, we're also focusing a lot with our counselors on getting out there and doing employer engagement.  So we're going to be developing individual goals and, you know, objectives in terms of how much time is spent out in the community engaging employers and looking for jobs.  That's one of our big focuses with a lot of the changes and everything we've done is give them time to get out there and create jobs and work with employers.  Not sit and do paperwork.  So I think we are set up in a good way for that.  As Jonathan had said that was coincidental with a lot of the state budget issues.  A good number of staff have retired.  So as we replace new staff, this is just a part of their everyday job.  They don't know the difference.  And I think that\'a0has actually been the buy\uc0\u8209 in from the staff who are still here and buy\u8209 in from our new staff.  It was a great experience and made us think.  Sometimes we look back and you realize everything has changed.  You don't realize it at the time.  But you look back two years and say wow, it's something based on our goals that we changed.  I think we're really going forward.  We're getting a new computer system, a case management system in the next year that will be, you know, making Career Index Plus part of that system.  So it's going to be linked into our I.P.  That is something that we want to do with the new system.  We decided that because we're changing the computer system.  Right now we have a system setup and it doesn't make sense to do it until the new system.\
Once that is on board, we'll be using that rather than the ONET.  Currently it's linked to ONET.  We'll link it to the Career Index Plus.  So that's it for us.\
\
>> JONATHAN RICHMOND: Next slide please. \
\
>> Okay.  I want to thank Mary and Julie and Jonathan so much for the wonderful presentation.  And I see we already have some questions coming in.  That's wonderful.  One is about what browser supports the Career Index Plus website.  I know that I use Google Chrome.  But I don't have, you know, an issue of having to use JAWS or something else with it.  So Julie, this may be for you in terms of what browsers right now that you have found to work? \
\
>> JULIE MCLEAN: Well I have been communicating with Jeff Hughs who is part of WINTAC development.  And he tells me that all three browsers:  Internet Explorer, Google Chrome, and Firefox work fine.  What we run into is a lot of our clients don't have the latest and greatest.  They don't have the newest version of JAWS.  They may have the\'a0free downloadable screen reader NVDA, and that supposedly works well Google Chrome.  John Hughs is trying to form a users group of people who use assistive software so we can inform ourselves so we can inform our clients on a regular basis.\
\
>> A follow\uc0\u8209 up to that.  Can they use it on both desktops and iPads? \
\
>> JULIE MCLEAN: Yes.  I have not tested it with an iPad, but that is my understanding that that works in both places. \
\
>> Right.  Okay.  Another question that came in.  Are your V.R. counselors mandated to use the Career Index Plus with all clients? \
\
>> Yes, they are actually mandated.  They are asking you that we did not \uc0\u8209 \u8209 \'a0in the past we have had goals regarding how much usage we have for employer outreach and Career Index Plus, but we decided not to make a mandated goal.  So we're encouraging them to use it as much as possible.  And as we come in with results that are very low with some counselors, they're getting the mandated hour, you know, how much time is expected to use them.  It's kind of more, we don't want to get another mandate or a benchmark or anything, you know, that's just going to feel like it's a negative.  So we're just trying to still encourage.  And it seems like that has been working, give or take a couple counselors.  And like I said, if they are the counselors that aren't using it, they're getting goals.  And the rest are jumping on board and using it.  They should be increasing a little bit more.\
\
\
>> And on every single IPE, a counselor has to put, we have a box where they need to put projected growth for an occupation, what the education level is for that position, as well as what the projected salary is.  So that's the minimum information that each counselor needs to get from the Career Index Plus and place that on the IPE. \
\
>> Thank you.\
And there's been a bunch of questions and comments about really looking at the Career Index Plus versus some other tools like the World of Work Inventory and some other assessment tools.  And I know that there are some limited assessment capabilities in the Career Index Plus, but that's really not its thing.  So, you know, what do you think about that distinction and how do you combine your comprehensive assessment into using the Career Index Plus? \
\
>> So we definitely consider our comprehensive assessment in terms of helping to identify a vocational goal.  We would take a look at what's the person's past work experience?  What is their education level?  Where do they want to go in the future?  So that is all tied into by using the Career Index Plus, there are several different categories.  And I know Julie could expand upon that in terms of interest profiling or interest testing in a few other categories Julie.\
\
>> JULIE MCLEAN: Yes.  Definitely.  One of the things that I think is really helpful for people who claim they will do everything is to have them do the interest profile and look at those categories of types of work that they would be willing to do.  And that whole rating system of no way would I do that type of job.  Yes.  That sounds like maybe or maybe I don't know.  And then you get the individual rating on the highest interest areas for, you know, an individual.  And I think that's really important for people to think more about well, you say you might want to do something that involves a calculations, a lot of very concrete data.  Whereas someone wants to be a creative person and develop ideas.  So you can really draw some lines about what's going to be something that somebody is going to enjoy, have the aptitude for, and be successful in. \
\
So there was one part of the Career Index under my stuff that I found very difficult and tedious with a screen reader, and that had to do with work contacts.  That was to assess whether you wanted to stand for two hours a day or not at all, your stress levels, do you want to work with people who are angry like in some kind of customer service role.  And I think a lot of that was very detailed and very difficult for somebody to use.  I know it was for me with a screen reader.  But I think there's a lot of other good information out there.  This gets our clients thinking about this sounds interesting.  I would like to learn more about that.  And because you can put in things about past jobs you've had, you can pull up associated jobs.  I know we have a lot of our clients who have had work, they've lost their jobs because of vision loss, and maybe they have to go into a new career.\
And they can pull up some associated titles that they might never have thought about without the help of something like Career Index.\
\
>> Thank you so much.  And again, thanks to our team.  We are out of time.  I just quickly see about is the Career Index Plus more in\uc0\u8209 depth than ONET.  And I will say that Career Index Plus, my understanding takes in materials from ONET and also from your state labor market information site.  But there is a lot of training and information out there about the Career Index Plus that you can either find from the JD\u8209 VRTAC at Explore VR, or go on the website for the WINTAC site, because they are doing that.  And so, yes, we're past time.  It's 1 o'clock.  And we will be putting this screen up now for the evaluation.  And we hope that you will fill that out.  You need to if you want to get your CRC credit.  And again, thanks so much to Mary, Julie, and Jonathan.  It was great working with you guys.  Happy holidays everybody!\
\
 \
>> Thank you! \
\
>> Thank you!\
\
>> Thank you! \
\
>> Thank you. \
}