{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1504\cocoasubrtf830
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\tx432\tx1006\tx1584\tx2160\tx2735\tx3455\tx4175\tx4895\tx5616\tx6334\pardeftab720\sl-320\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 ROUGH EDITED COPY\
\
ICI-UMB\
SOUTH CAROLINA SVRA WEBINAR\
AUGUST 30, 2018\
1:00 P.M. ET\
\
CART PROVIDED BY:\
ALTERNATIVE COMMUNICATION SERVICES, LLC\
www.CaptionFamily.com\

\b0 \
***\
\pard\tx432\tx1006\tx1584\tx2160\tx2735\tx3455\tx4175\tx4895\tx5616\tx6334\pardeftab720\sl-320\sa373\partightenfactor0
\cf0 This is being provided in a rough-draft format.  Communication Access Realtime Translation (CART) is provided in order to facilitate communication accessibility and may not be a totally verbatim record of the proceedings.  \
\pard\tx432\tx1006\tx1584\tx2160\tx2735\tx3455\tx4175\tx4895\tx5616\tx6334\pardeftab720\sl-640\qc\partightenfactor0

\f1\fs28 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd-3\expndtw-12
***\
\pard\tx432\tx1007\tx1584\tx2160\tx2735\tx3456\tx4175\tx4895\tx5615\tx6336\pardeftab720\sl-320\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 	>> DeBRITTANY MITHCELL:  Good afternoon, everyone, my name is DeBrittany Mitchell I'm a knowledge translation associate at the Institute for Community Inclusion.  Thanks, everyone, for joining today's webinar.  Before we get started, I would like to run through some quick housekeeping items.  As participants, you all are automatically muted.  So you don't have to worry about finding the mute button, if you're joining by phone or via your computers.  For those new to Zoom, you'll find a bar at the top or bottom of your screen, which allows you to chat with attendees.  In the chat box you can leave comments or ask questions  Please be sure to select all panelists and attendees from the blue drop-down so the entire group can see your comments and questions.  \
	You can enter your questions and comments throughout the discussion and we'll address them at the end of the presentation.  We'll have a question and answer session facilitated by Russ from ICI.  \
	If you experience any technical difficulties today, please note that in the chat box, and I'll do my best to assist you.  And also today's Panel Discussion is being live captioned.  I posted the URL to that in the chat box in the bottom right hand corners of your screens.  \
	Finally, this webinar will be recorded today and will be posted on explore VR within the next few weeks and that Web site address is www.exploreVR.org.  For those who are interested in receiving CRC credit for attending this webinar there will be a link to a survey sent out tomorrow.  \
	And it can take up to six weeks for you to receive that CRC credit.  So thanks again, everyone, for attending and at this time I would like to turn it over to Russ, who will introduce us and today's webinar content.\
	>> RUSS THELIN:  Thank you DeBrittany.  I appreciate that.  What I would like to do for just a moment is I'm going to override the screen that you have up for just a moment.  And I would like to put up a quick slide or two that I would like to address for purposes of kind of giving an introduction to the webinar that we have today.  Again, introducing myself, my name is Russ Thelin, I'm a senior policy fellow with the University of Massachusetts Boston Institute for Community Inclusion.  And it was my privilege to be lead of the intensive technical assistance team that worked with the South Carolina Vocational Rehabilitation Department.  Other team members besides myself were DeBrittany Mitchell who is kind of facilitating this webinar for us today.  We had a couple of individuals at different times on the technical assistance team from the Jobs for the Future organization.  Lexie Wah was part of that for some time and she went to other things and Tiffany Smith was part of the TA team.  And the other member of our team was Joe Marrone, also of the Institute for Community Inclusion.  \
	At the outset, I just want to share what a pleasure it was to work with such a solid vocational rehabilitation agency.  And the staff members that we worked with there, providing technical assistance during the time of this project.  They were invested, very well organized.  Innovative, open to ideas.  They took our technical assistance and then were off to the races to achieve their goals and objectives.  And as a team -- I think I speak for the team in sharing that we really enjoyed the opportunity we had to work with the agency.  \
	I wanted to take just a couple of minutes.  And I'm going to do this quickly because most of the time needs to go to the agency and I'm not going to go into detail because they do.  But I wanted to just touch base on some of the achievements that the agency accomplished before we get into the detail of what they want to share.  \
	Because you will hear greater detail during the remainder of the webinar.  \
	On this slide it shows some of the things that were accomplished over the course of the project.  SCVRD enhanced and expanded their network of business development specialists.  They expanded customized employment initiatives with the business community as well as technical colleges.  They developed a series of what I call glossies, marketing and informational materials that they could share with businesses to show the support that they could provide as well as to other partners.  They enhanced and repurposed their Career Connect system as the platform for their business relations that you're going to hear about.  Wherein it contained tools, a variety of resources, a place to gather data and information and repurposed and expanded it so there was agency utility across all of the members or at least all of the critical members of their vocational rehabilitation agency.  As was mentioned here briefly they worked with technical colleges.  They did innovative partnering with businesses that you will probably hear about.  They developed technology as a team member, meaning that there was a resource that helped them to manage the work they were doing.  And they had purposeful data gathering.  And an organizational integration where the work of the business engagement effort and the Labor Market Information and other things were not kind of stand-alone outside of the culture of the agency overall but it really was quite integrated.  So there's a lot that you're going to hear about today.  \
	But as a quick summary, I just wanted to cover those.  And without any further ado, I'm going to turn the time over now to Cathy Clower and Ryan Skinner of the South Carolina vocational rehabilitation Division so that we can hear in more detail the things that they have been able to accomplish.  So Cathy, Ryan, it's all yours and I'll stop my share now so we can go back to your PowerPoint\
	>> CATHY CLOWER:  Thank you, Russ, for the invitation to participate in the webinar.  \
	So today Ryan and I, we're going to discuss how a system change led to customized training initiatives and provided opportunities for VR consumers.  \
	And we're going to start off by introducing how this change led to success.  \
	We will discuss in detail how the workforce innovation -- sorry  \
(Chuckles).\
	>> CATHY CLOWER:  How the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act strengthened our alignment with partners and led us to becoming part of a sector strategies approach and we'll also talk about how being part of the new approach to workforce development led to customized training initiatives that have resulted in successful employment for VR consumers.  \
	So first let me provide you with a little background on how this change occurred.  \
	As you all know, the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act increases collaboration between workforce development partners to ensure that partners are providing coordinated and complementary services thus allowing job seekers to more easily acquire the skills, training and credentials needed to meet employer requirements.  \
	So this emphasis on collaboration allowed us to be part of the state sector strategies approach, which encourages partners to work more closely together to meet the needs of industry.  \
	And as part of the sector strategies approach, our state was divided into four regions with a VR representative on each team.  \
	And the goal of these teams was to identify growing industry in each region so that we could pull together resources from all of the partners in order to develop and expand a pipeline of talent to better meet employers' needs.  \
	Next slide.  \
	Here you see a diagram that explains how the sector strategies approach shifted our focus.  Sector strategies emphasize expanding workforce partners to also include businesses.  This means we now also see employers as partners who help design our services to meet industry needs and no longer just customers.  \
	With the sector strategies approach, employers have been involved with validating data on demand industries and occupations within their regions.  Employers have also participated in surveys and focus groups.  Conducted by the sector strategies teams.  So that the teams can get a better understanding of the employers' needs and their pain points, or what keeps them up at night.  \
	Next slide.  \
	While we will remain focused on providing quality individualized services to VR consumers, we have increased our efforts to collaborate with our workforce and business partners to provide an expanded and steady talent pipeline to create industry-wide solutions.  \
	Next slide.  \
	One of the things that we have heard from employers is that their time is valuable and that a job fair isn't always worth their time so they asked to see a more structured approach taken to job fairs.  In the past the goal was always to have as many employers as possible at the event and a large turnout of consumers.  \
	Many times the consumer skills didn't align with the employers' needs.  So in recognizing this as an issue, a sector strategy approach was taken and making a change from holding job fairs to the use of Talent Fairs.  And I'm going to turn it over to Ryan now.  And he's going to explain more about Talent Fairs.\
	>> RYAN SKINNER:  Thank you, Cathy, good afternoon, everyone I'm Ryan Skinner regional business development specialist for VR.  And I serve the Upstate.  \
	I wanted to give an example of these Talent Fairs, this term we used in this methodology.  \
	A couple of years back when I was in the field as a local business development specialist, not only did it become aware to me that there was a demand for customer service reps through Call Centers within that area, but counselors were also coming to me with a vocational goal of the consumer of clerical, data entry clerk, file clerk, customer related VOs.  \
	So putting two and two together, and with the Talent Fair logic, I put together a Talent Fair with a company called BPO American.  They were a local Call Center who were interested in working with us.  So did a little bit of homework.  Identified seven consumers that we had that had that vocational goal.  And then BPO American representatives came in and interviewed all seven of those clients.  They wound up hiring four at that time directly.  \
	As an initiation to that relationship, we had a discussion about the vision for customized training.  So a couple of years passed.  We talked about that.  We worked on that.  And that came to fruition.  \
	So next slide, please.  And that resulted in customized training opportunity.  \
	Next slide.  \
	So again, the Talent Fair kind of was the conduit both for the relationship but also the beginning discussions of the opportunity for the customized training  So in short, a mock mini Call Center was set up in our Lyman Training Center.  That was one of the areas I served  And they were in the process of building this new Training Center.  \
	That Training Center not only provides VR consumers with helpful skills, but now a talent pipeline for BPO American.  And sometimes where it fits other companies in the same sector in our area.  \
	Before the consumer can enter the Call Center, we determine the level of preparation they may need.  And so that keeps an individualized.  For example, if the individual has identified they want to be in that field, but they have no experience, we may use one of our customer service training classes or Business Application Plus as a way for them to get -- start to get those baseline skills and understand what they need.  Either way, no matter where the individual is at, they go into that mini Call Center.  \
	Next slide.  \
	So once they are in the hands-on call center, they are trained first on mock calls from the trainers.  Calling in from BPO American and then they graduate to taking real calls.  And let me preface it.  You can see on the slide, as part of the partnership, BPO American provides one of their employees as an on-site trainer for our consumers.  And so, again, they take some kind of mock calls  But then they graduate to the real calls.  \
	Once that trainer feels the trainee is ready to begin, then they start taking live calls under our roof.  And that's what kind of makes it customized.  \
	The consumer, the trainee, they may receive calls to make reservations, pay traffic tickets.  They could be a call service for a doctor's office but those are accounts that BPO American has with their clients.  And you know, depending on how the individual does, they can graduate to different accounts within BPO American as they continue gaining confidence and skills toward work readiness.  \
	The program is very individualized, as I said.  It's based on our trainee or consumers' needs.  So there's no set time that they are there really.  Typically it is from about 8 to 16 weeks but because BPO American is listening to the consumers take those calls, they are able to vet when it's time to hire them.  And typically we're in communication with them, too, about their availability.  So we can also kind of be staging, hey, this is our strongest trainee right now.  You've got an opening in two weeks.  So we're moving them in that direction.  \
	Next slide.  \
	Of course now the most important part is success, success for the consumer and for the business.  Next slide.  \
	\
	So kind of looking there at the slide, you can kind of see the success since fall of 2017, when the initiative really began, we've had 16 VR consumers enter that -- entered into customer service jobs.  Overall, it's created a pipeline of talent, as well, specifically for BPO but also if you look at the other businesses there, Sitel is also a Call Center in Upstate.  TD Bank has Call Center customer service related positions.  You see some of the other home healthcare.  So those positions there at the main office they are taking those calls, sending emails, and so forth.  So you can kind of see some of the success there.  We are excited about it both with our partner for our consumer but for the impact it can have in workforce development as a whole.  \
	Next slide, please.  \
	So what I'm going to do now is we have had some other customized trainings kind of birthed under the same concept so I'm going to turn it back over to Cathy to let her talk about that.\
	>> CATHY CLOWER:  Another customized training that has been developed is a partnership that we began with Ruiz Foods.  Next slide, please.  \
	VR began this partnership with Ruiz Foods in 2015 after their opening of a distribution center in Florence, South Carolina.  And Ruiz Foods is the largest Mexican frozen food company in the U.S.  Initially the company hired three consumers into entry level positions and those positions were food production associates.  So next year Ruiz Foods realized they needed not only more candidates but they needed skilled candidates.  \
	Next slide.  \
	So our business development specialists in the Florence area worked with the Southeastern Institute of Manufacturing and Technology at the Florence-Darlington Technical College to customize their manufacturing and certification program to meet Ruiz Foods' needs.  \
	First VR consumers are assessed in our work Training Center before they are considered for the training.  The customized training, which is referred to as the manufacturing skills pre-employment training, is one week in length.  The training was condensed from the original manufacturing certification program, which was several weeks in length.  \
	So by understanding Ruiz's needs, we realized they did not need a four-week training.  That they needed just a one-week program.  So it was a win-win for the employer and for the job seekers.  \
	And with the manufacturing skills pre-employment training, consumers earn certifications in forklift driving, OSHA 10  and Six Sigma yellow belt and after completing the training consumers are guaranteed an interview with the company.  Next slide, please.  VR to date, 64 VR consumers have been hired by Ruiz Foods since November 2015.  And not only are VR consumers getting jobs, but they are also being promoted.  For example, one of our consumers has been promoted to an operations supervisor where he supervises 266 employees.  And there's his picture there.  \
	>> RYAN SKINNER:  He's the one on the left.  He's the tall one.\
(Chuckles).\
	>> CATHY CLOWER:  And these are actually decent wages for the area.  They start at $13 an hour and it's an average of $22 an hour after promotion.  \
	So although this training was originally customized for Ruiz Foods, we're finding that it's also meeting the needs of other industry in the area.  So VR consumers are finding opportunities with other employers as a result of this training.  \
	Next slide.  \
	So I know we're going to go to a question and answer session next.  But here is our contact information, if you think of any questions later on, please feel free to reach out to us.  And there's our telephone numbers and email addresses  \
	>> RUSS THELIN:  Okay.  This is Russ again.  And Cathy and Ryan, thank you very much for that information.  I think there was some really great examples of the way you have worked with industry, with technical centers, technical training centers and other things in ways to interact and engage with businesses in some very unique ways.  We have a good amount of time here so I would like to invite those of you who are on the call as attendees to either in the chat box type your questions or comments.  DeBrittany, we can potentially open up the microphones, as well.  So that people can ask their questions that way, as well.  \
	So let's open the floor and let's hear from you as attendees, what other questions would you have?  And are there other things that you would like to talk about as it relates to what you have heard from the South Carolina VRD program?  \
	Are we going to be a quiet group today?  \
	Okay.  I've got a couple of questions that are coming in.  We have a question from Nora Perry.  Now they are coming in very fast.  Have you had any customized trainings for persons who are visually impaired?  Because you're a general program and your agency -- there is a separate agency for the blind and visually impaired.  I don't know, Cathy, or Ryan, if you're able to answer that question.\
	>> RYAN SKINNER:  Yeah, Russ  All I can really attest to in these initiatives, these customized trainings, we don't set them up based on an individual's impairment or barrier per se.  Rather, they are driven by the need of the business.  So kind of as we have charted off on this -- chartered off on this course with ya'll's support and kind of going back to some of the things Cathy talked about is, you know, what does dual customer approach mean for our agency?  And how can we really look at both our consumer's needs towards skill gains and job readiness along with that other customer, which is the business.  \
	So we're charged with getting the individual competitively employed.  So again the trainings are built under the assumption that the individual's disability is being managed.  Companies, we've got to consider whether they get a specific training with a company or we give them specific training.  We have to consider what the company can and can't do.  But most of the companies we deal with, they have their EEOCs and -- you know, their equal opportunity employer.  So what we hear from the business is as long as the individual can do the basic functions of the job, we're going to hire them, regardless of what their impairment is  \
	>> RUSS THELIN:  Great, thanks, Ryan  Another question that came in, and I might phrase it just a little bit differently  Does South Carolina have a minimum wage requirement that's different than the Federal standard minimum wage?  \
	>> CATHY CLOWER:  Minimum wage in South Carolina is 7.25 an hour.  \
	>> RUSS THELIN:  Okay.  So the comment in the chat box is $13 per hour is awesome.  Which I echo.  So when you consider what the minimum wage is, I think that's a significant achievement there.  If you're willing to share more about the training and how you chose that particular entity was a particular question.  And then the other question, is your work source or your One Stop Centers, are they involved in your efforts, as well?  \
	>> CATHY CLOWER:  Yeah, so in regards to the particular training initiatives, that ties back to the sector strategies piece that I spoke about earlier.  Within our state from the sector strategies team, teams across the state, there's focused industries.  And those industries are diversified manufacturing, healthcare, consumer trades, Information Technology, transportation, distribution, and logistics.  And some of the areas of the state involved in looking at all of those specific industries.  Some have taken just one industry to focus on.  \
	So for example, with the Ruiz Foods, that falls under diversified manufacturing.  So that, you know, of course was a sector.  And then with -- was a sector.  And then with BPO American, the Call Center under business services, that kind of crosses all of the different industries because customer service is something that's needed across the board.  \
	So the tie-in, of course, was with the sector strategies approach.  In regards to the training.  And also, yes, as part of the sector strategy teams within the state, I mentioned that there's a VR representative on each team.  But also other team members includes individuals from America's job centers and the Department of Employment and Workforce.  Education and economic development.  And other community partners within each of the regions.  \
	>> RUSS THELIN:  Yeah, I think it's worth mentioning that when you talk about sector strategies and the way that you have approached that, when you look at the -- kind of the dynamic of the state of South Carolina, you do have some regional areas that do have some -- to some degree some sector strategy variations from down closer to the coastline to more inland and other things like that.  I don't know if -- I'm probably butchering how I would even articulate that.  But Cathy or Ryan, is there a chance you could maybe talk just a little bit about some of the regional variations within the state?  And how maybe the sector strategies are being used depending on what industries are prevalent in these particular regions.  Is that something you could address?  \
	>> CATHY CLOWER:  Yes.  The previous mentioned industries, that was kind of an across the board.  And each regional team is taking a specific area of focus.  So for example in our south coast region so that's the region across the lower part of the state near the ocean, those -- they are actually focused on all of those industries at once.  And then another region of the state they are putting their focus primarily on healthcare.  And Ryan, in the Upstate, that's kind of the business services is one area of focus as well as I think manufacturing, as well, they have put kind of -- instead of looking at all of -- five of those categories, they are focusing on just one of two in some regions.  Also in the south coast region there was a lot of discussion about adding hospitality as a focused sector and there was quite a bit of conversation and it wasn't added to the south coast region team's focus but some of the local areas are individually focused on that, some of the counties in particular because that's a large tourism like for example Charleston and Beaufort, they are very heavily focused on tourism.  But one of the reasons it wasn't included in the sector strategies approach for the south coast region, because there was some -- there was some concern about the wages.\
	>> RYAN SKINNER:  Russ I wanted to point out, too, there's kind of two things going on here, as well.  The sector strategy is a state workforce initiative.  So like Cathy has said, it crosses over to a lot of different sectors.  But then as I'm sure a lot of the folks listening to us can attest, our individual agencies, in this case for us it's us as VR, you know, down in the local field kind of in the weeds, so to speak, you can run across businesses that have more specific needs for a specific area.  You know, although road -- highway road construction is a big need across our state in the Upstate through Interstates 85 and 26, which cover most of the state, that's a big need in that corridor up there.  \
	So there's an opportunity there where we can potentially identify trainings that align with the business's needs and create that pipeline.\
	>> RUSS THELIN:  Ryan, I appreciate that distinction and Cathy your more global approach to answering my question there.  And I think that that's helpful for folks to see.  Because as they talk about these principles, you know, obviously they need to be somewhat tailored, although still maintaining some continuity to the various industries, depending on state regions and some of those things.  Ryan, you had mentioned -- and maybe before I ask this question, maybe let me pose to the participants, again, if you have questions or as we talk other things come up, please jot your questions down in the chat box so that we can address the things that come to your mind as we talk, as well.  \
	But back to a question from me and I'm going to take a little prerogative as someone who has been part of the TA team and knows some of the efforts that you've been making that you haven't talked about here, you had mentioned the transportation and a lot of construction to your highways and byways and things of that nature.  \
	At one time there was -- and I'm assuming it's still occurring to some degree, I don't know.  You would have to update us.  But you had worked with business in a partnership where they had donated a simulator to the agency or made available to the agency the simulator for some of the components of road resurfacing or road construction and things of that nature.  \
	I don't know if either of you were close enough to that effort that you could speak to that or not.  \
	>> RYAN SKINNER:  Yeah.\
	>> RUSS THELIN:  I just wanted to check and see.\
	>> RYAN SKINNER:  Yeah, I can.  So how that worked out was similar to the customized training concept that road construction need is here in the Upstate.  I'm sure it's probably in the lower state in certain areas, too.  \
	But long story short, the business actually owns a simulator.  A heavy equipment operation simulator.  So imagine that you're sitting in the actual seat that is in the piece of equipment.  But you're sitting in it in front of a large TV screen with a computer almost a video game type application, where it can be used.  They take that thing to schools and they let students sit in it and see what it's like, take it to colleges.  It's kind of a roadshow piece.  But as we got to know Human Resource Department with that company, we developed a training that includes a soft skill side that we teach under our roof.  And specific modules -- and this is key  Specific modules from the NCCER which is a national equipment operation manual.  The business helped us build our curriculum by telling us which modules they wanted taught.  And then they also get OSHA construction as part of the training.  And then they have hours in the simulator where they are getting basic entry level skills to that  \
	Now, when they are hired in most cases, they don't go right into equipment operation.  But what we have done is we have handed the employer exactly what they are asking for.  And that's a skilled applicant.  \
	So that's been an effective model.  We're also doing it now tying into, as you can imagine, somebody has got to drive that dump truck.  So we are almost in an emergency need for CDL drivers here in the state of South Carolina  We have built some baseline CDL permit attainment classes.  \
	We figured out that our consumers sometimes do better when we can get them prepped for a CDL license training with the technical school or business when we have helped them get their permit at their pace  Rather than go into one of those class settings that can be sometimes intimidating and move very fast.  \
	So we are now kind of birthing that initiative, as well.  Again, it gives individualized training and vetting to our consumer in an environment where we can really provide them those job readiness skills.  And then make that confident handoff to the employer\
	>> RUSS THELIN:  I appreciate that detail  I think that that is one of the most innovative things that I've heard of across the country.  And there are a number of them.  But actually having that kind of business relationship and engagement with the business that they provide some of their resource to you, you work with them to meet what they expect of individuals to compete for positions that they have.  And then working together to make those needs get met for what is an in-demand job given some of the efforts that South Carolina is making right now to improve their roadways and things of that nature I just think it's a fascinating example of business engagement, business relations and meeting labor market needs.  \
	We have a question related to that particular piece here, Ryan, was it hard to get consumers into these training programs?  \
	>> RYAN SKINNER:  That's a great question.  And it's a key piece to making these things work so from our business service role we were able to bring this Labor Market Information and business employer need back to the agency but at the same time we also had to be drivers for the consumer service department side of the house to get them to understand we've got to reshape our conversations with our consumers.  Take for example a consumer that we open a case on and because of either their background or their disability we steer them towards a janitorial career path  But have we trained our counselors to ask questions, deeper questions sometimes.  Let's say that individual is fixing to have knee surgery and really doesn't want to be on their feet.  \
	Could that be somebody we steer towards a CDL program?  So it is difficult in the beginning but it's extremely doable.  I think it happens through retraining those intake employees to think about and know that Labor Market Information and know what's available in that area to say, hey, look, I hear you want a first shift job.  But that's not going to happen in manufacturing.  But if we can steer you to this other vocation, the pay is going to be maybe even better.  You're going to have all of the flexibility you want.  Et cetera.  And so forth  \
	>> RUSS THELIN:  Great, thank you.  That's very, very helpful.  Quite informative.  \
	Do we have other questions from the group that you would like to ask our experts today?  \
	Do you like that Cathy and Ryan I called you experts.\
(Chuckles).\
	>> RYAN SKINNER:  Far too kind  \
	>> RUSS THELIN:  I think you are.  \
	>> RYAN SKINNER:  You know, Russ, I think it's worth pointing out, it's very simple.  I mean, I think these things are very doable.  You just have to have -- you already -- these agencies have passionate people.  You just have to stay the course.  And even in this situation it's as simple as things like letting -- let the business create what you need.  Let them drive what the curriculum looks like.  They are going to have buy-in.  You've already got them on the frontend.  So when it's time for the individual to get a job, we're not scrounging around trying to find somewhere for them to go.  \
	The employer in a lot of cases, for example, with the heavy equipment operation training, the employer comes out and just interviews and talks to the trainees before the training ever starts just to go ahead and start to get to know them.  \
	So you know, certainly it takes the right partner.  But through relationships and trust and rapport those things can be done.  \
	>> RUSS THELIN:  Yeah; yeah.  The passion and the ability to communicate and partner opens up a lot of doors to find solutions to both meeting the needs of business where it exists.  But also making that available to the rehabilitation professionals to assist clients in making meaningful informed choices about what their options are to return to work.  And so I appreciate your sharing that.  \
	I'll highlight, we've had the slide up for a bit now.  Make sure you get either phone numbers or emails for Cathy or Ryan, as you hear about things I'm sensing there's a lot of interest in some of the things that they have been sharing.  And I want to make sure that you are aware that you're welcome to contact either of them to learn more information as we go forward  \
	A couple more questions have come in  The first one says, do you have an average age range for your customized training consumers?  When you consider those who have done it, is there kind of an age range that you typically see?  \
	>> RYAN SKINNER:  Russ, I can speak to the highway road construction and the BPO American.  With the road construction we actually had -- our youngest was a man who had recently graduated from high school but was not going to college.  And then we had an -- we had a male and female, which was excellent, we were very excited about that with the highway road construction in their early 40s who had done some different things throughout their careers.  So that was kind of the range for construction.  \
	The Call Center training has predominantly been individuals in the 30 to 40-year-old range.  \
	>> RUSS THELIN:  Okay.  Another question that has come in, and I think you partially answered this.  But some additional information, if you have it, could be helpful  Do you partner with colleges to do the training?  \
	>> CATHY CLOWER:  At this point in time most of our partnerships with the -- with these initiatives that we just referenced, the customized trainings, have been either in-house or with our technical college partners.  But you know, there's always opportunities -- once you meet with your business partners, finding out what their needs are, which is the direct course to go.  And a lot of times it is the technical colleges because they can condense some of their training programs to meet specific needs of the employer.  Just like how I would reference with the Ruiz Foods where initial that manufacturing class was over a week in length and it was broken down to one week based upon the actual parts of that training that Ruiz Foods really only needed.\
	>> RYAN SKINNER:  Russ another good example that piggybacks what Cathy just said too if you remember me mentioning the recent CDL initiative we're working on\
	>> RUSS THELIN:  Uh-huh.\
	>> RYAN SKINNER:  So we're doing the in-house permit preparation.  Two of the funnels, though, off of that are -- one is with the local technical school.  So we help our individual get the permit and then funnel them to the technical school for the CDL licensure training.  But we also have a business in that area who has their own internal training to get the license  So there is a good example of where we're working in with the business directly or the technical school based on what the individual wants to do.\
	>> RUSS THELIN:  Yeah and I think that's an important point to bring out, Ryan, because it's not necessarily that you're working with either the technical school or the business but the partnerships are more dynamic than that.  You actually work not only with the business but also with the Technical Center, the Technical Training Center, as well.  \
	Could you speak just a little bit to how this effort with these things, how you coordinate that with the counseling professionals within the agency?  Because obviously they are a critical partner in the development of this for consumers, as well.\
	>> RYAN SKINNER:  Absolutely.  One of the things that as we -- and Cathy talked to this with one of her initial slides -- no, excuse me, you did when you gave your overview, you talked about how we have grown the amount of business development specialists.  And then through those we call them BDSs, through those BDSs we were able to take baby steps  Because mind you, not everybody loves change.  So -- but what we're talking about is retraining.  So those BDSs would be back in their local area offices having weekly team meetings where they are starting to coach and teach.  What is Labor Market Information.  Where do you find it.  \
	You know, add this into your intake discussion with the consumer.  To say okay, you're telling me you want to go to work.  Well, unless you're planning to move out of this county, here are the top three demand sectors and we're going to have you take this aptitude test and if you're pinging on three or four of these things my advice and recommendation to you would be to take advantage of one of our trainings which by the way if they get one or two weeks in and it's just not from them then we steer them in another direction but hopefully that answers the question.  The counselor is a huge piece of that.  And how we're approaching that is really fleshing that out on the local level  Taking them by the hand almost and kind of helping retrain them and educate and coach them.  \
	>> RUSS THELIN:  That's a great answer.  Because it's very easy to see movement from a consumer working with a rehabilitation counselor to a business development specialist.  It could easily become just kind of a cold handoff as opposed to actually having an integrated communication system or culture whereby the counselor and that business development specialist can work together to make decisions for that individual that provides resources to them, allows for them to make the confirmed informed choice that they want to make.  \
	And that goes back to what I -- the other point that I was hopefully highlighting at the introductory piece is that this isn't something that's done just as a sidelight within the VR agency.  But this is an effort that's integrated within the system of how you provide services by these relationships.  And also through your Career Connect system that allows multiple users to access that information to help clients meet their needs.  \
	We haven't talked much about your Career Connect.  I don't know, is -- could you give just kind of a high-level overview of that system and what it does for individuals?  Because I think it's one of the strongest components of making tools, resources, material and data collection all in one spot that I've seen across the country.  I think it's a really great example.  \
	Could you speak just a few minutes about that?  You don't have to get into a lot of detail.  But just tell us a little bit about how that works within your organization.\
	>> CATHY CLOWER:  So our Career Connect system initially started out as a job matching system.  And with of course WOIA, we're revamping it to become more of a system to capture our data.  And also expanding it out to include all business engagement.  So any type of interaction with employers would be captured through the system.  \
	>> RYAN SKINNER:  That and Russ, it's also going to capture the activity related to the placement, too.  So we may have business engagement without any placement activity because that's what business service specialists or in our case a BDS does.  That's part of what they do.  Part of what all of our field staff do.  \
	So there will be times where there's not placement involved but on the times where it is involved like Cathy is saying, we're building fields and data fields to capture those very specific information that we need to report.  \
	>> RUSS THELIN:  Good; good.  Thank you.  I'm thinking of other things that I might want to share that I think would be important for our participants to hear.  \
	Are there any other questions that folks might have?  Looking at the time, we are coming up on our hour.  Is there anyone else who would like to ask a question?  If you could type that in the chat box, please, we'll make sure we get those addressed.  \
	And certainly, Cathy or Ryan anything else you would like to share toward bringing this to a toward please share any of your thoughts.\
	>> RYAN SKINNER:  I will say again I want to thank ya'll, thank you for your assistance.  It's been very helpful in not only educating us but helping us drive it.  So thank you for that.  \
	I'll kind of sign off by just reminding anyone still listening, please feel free to reach out to either one of us, Cathy or myself by email or phone.  We're more than willing to help.  And we look forward to that, answering any more questions or providing any more information.  \
	>> CATHY CLOWER:  And thank you, as well, I always like to share with our listeners that don't be afraid to start out and to start out small.  That's one thing that we always focus on is, you know, we start out small on these initiatives.  And we try to do it right.  We make sure the quality is there.  We make sure that these opportunities are the right fit for our consumers and also the right fit for our employer partners.  \
	So please reach out to us, if we can be of any assistance.  \
	>> RUSS THELIN:  Great, thank you very much.  And by all means, Ryan, there are more than just a few still listening.  there's 54 attendees who are still on the line.  So for those of you who are there, take that opportunity to reach out to them, if you would like to.  \
	Well, there's nothing wrong with wrapping up just a little bit early.  I don't see any additional questions that are coming in.  DeBrittany, is there anything else that we need to talk about before we sign off today.\
	>> DeBRITTANY MITCHELL: Thank you, Russ, thank you so much for facilitating the conversation  You did a great job.  Thank you also to Cathy and Ryan again you did a wonderful job with your presentation.  Thank you to all of the attendees for your time for signing on and listening this is just a reminder that a recording of this webinar will be on exploreVR.org and all of the state agencies that receive technical assistance through the job driven VR Technical Assistance Center that was really long but all of these state agencies will be presenting a webinar and you can find information about other upcoming webinars on exploreVR.org.  Thank you and have a great day, everyone.  \
	>> RYAN SKINNER:  Thank you.\
	>> RUSS THELIN:  Thanks Cathy and Ryan and have a great day, everyone else.\
	>> RYAN SKINNER:  You too, thank you.\
	>> CATHY CLOWER:  Thank you.  \
}